A spray of lava from
the river that melted one of the supports provided the
final straw. A huge section of a collection arm broke
away and fell into the lava, carrying the two Jedi
with it.
Still the fight continued, even as the collection
tower sank slowly into the lava. And still, neither
man could gain an advantage.
But that's not really true, Obi-Wan thought as he
ducked and wove and parried. Both he and Anakin
felt the anguish of their need to kill the other. But
Anakin had turned to the dark side, and despair and
pain strengthened the dark side. It gave him an
advantage Obi-Wan could not match. Unless he let
go of his own despair and let the living Force move
him - the Force that bound all living things together,
even Obi-Wan and this new, deadly, evil Anakin.
It was hard. It was, perhaps, the hardest thing he
had ever tried to do. For in letting go of his anguish,
his despair, and his pain, he would have to let go of
the Anakin who was his student, his brother, and his
dearest friend. He'd have to admit that this time, he
could not save the man who had saved his life so
many times, whose life he had saved at least as
often.
Obi-Wan couldn't do it. As the collection tower
sank farther into the lava, he looked for a way to
escape. A droid platform floated on air near the
tower. Obi-Wan took another swipe at Anakin, then
grabbed a hanging cable and swung out toward the
platform. At the height of his swing, he flipped him-
self into the air, landing precisely.
The platform wobbled, but it held his weight. He
leaned to one side, steering it away from the collec-
tion tower. Perhaps the sinking tower and the lava
would do what he had been unable to finish.
But when he looked back, Anakin was standing
on a worker droid, coming up fast. "Your combat
skills have always been poor," he taunted. "You're
called the Negotiator because you can't fight!"
"I have failed you, Anakin," Obi-Wan told him. "I
was never able to teach you to think."
Anakin nodded. "I should have known the Jedi
were plotting to take over."
"From the Sith!" Obi-Wan cried, shocked. "Anakin,
Chancellor Palpatine is evil."
"From the Jedi point of view!" Anakin retorted.
"From my point of view, the Jedi are evil."
The words stabbed at Obi-Wan, even though he
knew that Anakin was speaking out of his own pain.
He felt the dark side grow stronger, feeding on his
despair. And then, as Anakin came close enough to
swing his lightsaber once more, the Jedi in Obi-Wan
rose up and at last he did the thing he hadn't thought
he could do.
He let go. Calm, centered, free -for the
moment - of sorrow and despair, resting in the liv-
ing Force as he had been trained to do, Obi-Wan
Kenobi looked at his former friend and student, and
did the unexpected. He made a soaring leap into the
air and landed on the high bank of the lava river.
"It's over, Anakin," he said, looking down, "I have
the high ground. Don't try it."
"You underestimate the power of the dark side!"
Anakin shot back, and with the last word, he jumped.
And Obi-Wan's lightsaber moved, slicing through
Anakin's knees and then coming up to take his
remaining hand. Anakin's lightsaber fell at Obi-
Wan's feet. What was left of Anakin fell on the
burning black sand almost at the edge of the lava.
Anakin - no, Obi-Wan reminded himself, not
Anakin. Darth Vader. Darth Vader scrabbled at the
sand with his metal arm, trying to pull himself away
from the lava river. Obi-Wan looked down at the
maimed body, and at last felt tears sting his eyes.
"You were the Chosen One," he said, not to Darth
Vader, but to his dead friend Anakin, the man whose
spirit Darth Vader had murdered. "You were sup-
posed to destroy the Sith, not join them. You were to
bring balance to the Force, not leave it in darkness."
He swallowed hard. He couldn't see the body
through his tears; he could barely make out the shine
of Anakin's lightsaber on the ground at his feet.
"I hate you!" Vader screamed.